---
layout: post
title: Feeling Like Pablo: How Kanye's Making Me Blue
tags: music,Kanye
---

I started writing this post on Thursday as I was nearing what I thought was the release date and time of Kanye West's seventh album. I had been concerned for a few weeks that all of the press surrounding the album indicated it was going to be unfinished, or uncharacteristically imperfect.  Even though I still have yet to listen to the album, the way in which the rollout actually manifested between Thursday and today has me even more concered than I was last week.
<!--excerpt-->
Paying attention to the album creation and release process has always intrigued me, both as a fan and a musician.  Kanye's albums have always been especially interesting because of where he sits in pop culture: a huge celebrity, a musical innovator, an uncompormising control freak. Posh recording sessions in Hawaii with every imaginable pop star, biometrically sealed briefcases of master tapes, and 11th hour vocal tracks have become part of the mythology of his recent albums.

The rollout for his most recent album, 2013's *Yeezus*, was highly irregular for its time - radio silence until he went into an all-out media blitz in the month leading up to the album's release.  It was disconcerting to hear he was still putting the finishing touches on the album as he was releasing the lead single and shipping out the master files. It was annoying that he took big, scary stand against the music industry by refusing to allow pre-orders of the album.  But after stunts like Beyonce and Drake's digital-only out-of-nowhere releases, the *Yeezus* release just feels like a product of trying to strike a balance between creative control and fitting into the industry landscape.

I initially thought *The Life of Pablo* was going to be cut from a similar cloth, but Kanye has thrown the industry to the wind- and with it, pretty much any respect for the album as a product and finished piece of work.

As much as I loved Ye's transparency leading up to *TLOP*'s release, I was worried.  Multiple publicized tracklist changes and name changes suggested we'd be getting another last-minute release, cemented by the lack any mention of a physical release. 

The album was officially "launched" with a Madison Square Garden event to celebrate the debut of his most recent season of his Adidas clothing line.  I withheld judgement on music I only listened to as a 240p livestream, but had to once again check my expectations of ever hearing it at a reasonable bitrate when he tweeted another tracklist change and some additional recording after the event ended.

By the time he *actually* released the album some 48 hours later following an SNL performance, I was ready to get off of the emotional rollercoaster. I was no longer excited for one of my most anticipated albums of the year because the artist refused to step back for 48 hours and let his album be an album. I've heard critics remark how it's exciting to know that this album is a picture of an artist *right now* - not last week or a few months ago, but about 15-20 minutes ago.  That's fine if he's ready to step away and let the art stand for itself, but we're talking about a guy who [is still talking about changing the final product after he's released it](https://twitter.com/kanyewest/status/698971890581401600).

Even though this is really just one long complaint about my inability to get my grubby mitts on a compact disc of a music release, I think it's germane to Kanye as a historic artist. Kanye does not try to hide his concern for his legacy and contributions to society, so is it not fair to take a 100-mile view of how he's probably thinking about all of this? I think the series of stunts leading up to *The Life of Pablo* went beyond some crazy rogue marketing and pushing the limits of the music industry and into actively undermining his art. Kanye should take a page from his heroes and from his own past: if an idea is really going to turn the world on its head, the world will wait the extra 48 hours to get the best version of it.



 --

Whereas with *Yeezus* the public had suspicions of the noise behind the scenes, this time around Kanye pulled back the curtain and let the public see him warp his plans at the last minute.  He gave a release date of February 11th and shared lots of evidence he was still in the studio - even tweeting about still working on the album art a day before the album's release.  At the livestreamed release event, he just played the tracks off of his laptop and tweeted after the show he was just now going to get the album mastered.  He announced *another* new tracklist after the time fans expected to have the album in their hands.

As much as I expected to love the transparency, I was just worried. Say what you will about geniuses working in mysterious ways or against a deadline or something, but Kanye seemed to be bragging about a total lack of checks and balances. He has a history of being a meticulous perfectionist and suddenly seemed to be pushing his craft out the door days or hours after finishing it. I would be less skeptical if he wasn't billing this as an album - fellow Chicago-based megalomaniac Billy Corgan embraced the volatility of the music industry by releasing new Smashing Pumpkins music as non-traditional "song cycles." But Ye is billing this as a traditional record while going out of his way to make sure he puts the same amount of care into its release as any of his other records.

I'm not denying the last-minute changes and procrastination haven't always been an issue; they became a positive part of the mythology of *Yeezus*. But unlike with his previous releases, he got out in front of the world and said "here it is, my finished product," only to keep tinkering.  There were CDs to press and iTunes promotions to launch.  Even if some old-school album launch machinations are unnecessary, we're talking about a guy who [is still talking about changing the final product after he's released it](https://twitter.com/kanyewest/status/698971890581401600).

As Jayson Greene noted in his [review of the album for Pitchfork](http://pitchfork.com/reviews/albums/21542-the-life-of-pablo/), Kanye's 'devotion to the craft of album-making remains his greatest talent." As much as I've refused to acknowledge the "albums as an artform are dying" arguments, it's disconcerting to watch one of the format's best contributors seem to put less and less stock into the idea of an album as a singular piece of work.  Despite how good or bad the album is, I'll always be asking "what if" after knowing all of the details and watching Kanye treat his "album of a life" like I treat road trip playlist. Maybe it turns out I'm old-fashioned and artists will come up with new technology to keep modifying versions of their songs like I modify versions of my code.  I just hope in the future it feels like a mindful strategy and not a overwrought mistake.
